the Joe Rogan experience what you said
when you sat down was absolutely perfect
that the timing could not have been
better well tell everybody what you do
Michael
well thank you I'm a four AB lack of a
better term of medical detective I've
spent my whole career tracking
infectious diseases down trying to stop
him trying to understand where they come
from so we can make sure they don't
happen in the first place but most of
all trying to respond to situations just
like this just like this and just out
off the bat how serious is this is this
something that we need to be terrified
of or is this overblown or how do you
stand on this well first of all you have
to understand the timing of it in the
sense that is just beginning and so in
terms of what hurt pain suffering death
is account happens so far is really just
beginning this is going to unfold for
months to come yet and that's I think
what people don't quite yet understand
what we saw in China I'm convinced as
are many of my colleagues as soon as
they release all of these social
distances is mandated stay in homes
haven't left your home in weeks and
weeks kind of thing when they go back to
work they're on planes trains subways
buses crowded spaces manufacturing
plants even China is going to come back
again and so this really is acting like
an influenza virus something that
transmits very very easily through the
air we now have data to show that your
infectious before you even get sick and
in some cases quite highly infectious
just breathing is all that you need to
do so from this perspective I can
understand why people would say well
wait a minute flu kills a lot more
itself every year than this does and
already remind people this just was
beginning probably the best guesstimate
we have right now on what limited data
we have to say this could be at least 10
to 15 times worse than the worst
seasonal flu year we see 10 to 15 times
worse in terms of fatalities yeah yeah
and just illness in fact I just brought
some numbers we can serve early estimate
that this could require 48 million
hospitalizations 96 million cases
actually occurring over 480 thousand
deaths that can occur over the next
three to seven months with this
situation so this is not one that to
take lightly and I think that's what I
can understand if you say there's only
been 10 deaths or 20 dose or 50 does
just remember two weeks ago we are
talking about almost no cases in the
United States and now that we're testing
for it and watching the spread as its
unfolding those numbers going up
astronomically three weeks ago Italy was
just living life just fine now they're
literally in a virtual shutdown in the
northern parts of Italy and that's the
challenge with an infectious disease
like this it can spread very quickly and
it also can affect people I think maybe
to put this into modern terms this is
something we think of often and we think
of you know pre-antibiotic days you know
the old-time medicine we have an
employee at our Center for infectious
disease research and policy at the
university Minnesota and she has a dear
friend who lives in Milan Italy and she
works at a hospital there and she texted
this to this employee of ours last night
and this was an email that came out
yesterday from one of their physicians
in Milan at the largest hospital there
he said I just got a very disturbing
message from a cardiologist at one of
the Milan's largest hospitals they're
deciding who they have to let die
they aren't screening the staff anymore
because they need all hands on deck and
they have very small areas of the
hospital dedicated to non kovat patients
where they still screen doctors
everybody else is dedicated to kovat
patients so even if they're positive
meaning that they're sick they don't and
but they don't have a severe cough or
fever then they have to work he says
that that they're seen an alarming
number of cases in the forty-something
range range and as he took horrible
cases so we need to stop thinking that
this isn't only an old person's disease
that this is what's I'm gonna unfold not
just in wuhan it's unfolding in Milan
it's unfolding here in Seattle and this
is what's going to continue to rolling
Lee unfold throughout the world yeah
where did this rumor come from that it's
a an old person's disease is it just
because the majority of the people that
have died from it so far I've been older
yes in fact that's the primary risk
factor for dynast being old and then
having certain underlying health
problems for example in China those men
over the age of 70 who also smoked were
eight to ten percent of them died 65
percent of older Chinese men smoked the
case fatality rate or the percentage of
people who died and when
that same age group was only about 2% in
that case what very few women smoke now
the challenge we have is that that's the
Chinese data but there are a series of
risk factors that we worry about that if
they overlay on this disease are going
to cause bad outcomes and we happen to
be right at Ground Zero for one of the
major ones here in this country that's
obesity we know that obesity is just
like smoking in terms of its ability to
really cause severe life-threatening
disease and 45% of our population today
over the age of 45 in this country are
obese or sevillio obese and there's men
and women so one of the concerns we have
is we're gonna see more of these what I
would guess I would call very serious
and life-threatening cases occur in our
country because of a different set of
risk factors and we saw in China now you
mentioned that there's some sort of
incubation period before people become
sick they're still contagious what is
this incubation period and how do we
know about it when we call something an
incubation pepper we're talking about
from the time you and I got exposed
meaning I was in a room breathe in the
air that somebody else who was infected
with the virus was expelling out I
breathed it in how long from that time
period till the time period that you get
sick and what is that it's that's what
called incubation period so that's when
case numbers can double or triple in
every so many days in this case is about
four days so and we actually have data
there from people who are exposed one
time or one time only and we know when
they were exposed where they were
exposed and how sooner they get sick
afterwards so the chauffeur in the car
where that an individual is sick or
showing symptoms then the show forgets
that four days later you know they were
there one time at one time long and if
the chauffeur does not show any symptoms
he's still contagious he can also be
contagious too or he and that's one of
the things that's challenging here is
you and I might get exposed to somebody
who is totally asymptomatic no symptoms
that virus did appear well that's not a
very strong virus but in fact when it
infects us it could kill us so we've
seen cases of fatal disease that were
exposed to people that had minor
symptoms themselves Wow
this is what's unfolding here and this
is what I think is such an important you
know I said why the timing is so
important because you know Joe we really
got to get information
to the public there is so much missing
from information right now and you know
we're gonna be this for a while this is
not gonna happen overnight I worry I
keep telling people were handling this
like it's a corona blizzard you know two
or three days momenta normal this is a
corona virus winter and we're gonna have
the next three months or more six months
or more that are going to be like this
and you know so far this thing has been
unfolding exactly as we predicted it we
and our Center put out a piece on
January 20th and said this is going to
spread worldwide have time people said I
had no it's just China we put out a
piece the first week of February and
said this is gonna pop probably the last
week of February first week of March
does what happens is it has what's
called an R nought or a doubling time of
these every four days so to to increase
is doubling every four days so if you go
from two to four to eight to sixteen it
takes a while to build up but when you
start going from five hundred to a
thousand to two thousand to four
thousand that's what we're seeing happen
in places like Italy we're beginning to
see it in some ways up in Seattle it's
what happened in China and you know when
people are confronted with that suddenly
this low-risk phenomena ever talks about
isn't so low anymore and that's we need
to prepare people for now what can be
done like what worked in the average
person do I see people walking around
with masks on wearing gloves is that
nonsense largely yes first of all let's
step back the primary mechanism for
transmission is just the respirator out
it's just breathing in studies in
Germany which just have been published
literally in the last 24 hours they
actually followed a group of people who
had been exposed to somebody at
automobile manufacturing plant and then
they had nine people that with this
exposure he said if you have any
symptoms at all contact us we want to
follow up with a nail agreed well they
got infected and so in the very first
hours just feeling bad sore throat they
went in and sampled the throats their
their saliva their nose for virus they
did blood they did stool they did urine
and they found that at that very moment
when they first got sick they had
incredibly high levels of virus
sometimes ten thousand times that we saw
with SARS in their throats meaning they
were infectious at that point already
they hadn't even had symptoms yet of
really any nature they were coughing yet
and and that's where we're concerned
because that's the kind of trans
you know I always have said trying to
stop influence Irish transmission likes
try to stop the wind you know we've
never had anything successfully do that
other than vaccine and we don't have a
vaccine here so what's happening is that
people in public spaces are getting
infected and the way you need to address
that is unfortunately if you're older
over 55 you have some underlying health
problems which unfortunately a lot of
Americans do we have obesity then right
now you don't want to be in large public
spaces in trying to potentially get
infected so you can take care of that
part as far as what can public health do
reckon we can talk about this we're not
gonna have a vaccine anytime soon that's
happy talk well we you know we can close
schools one of the big challenges we
have right now if we close schools what
do we accomplish in influenza virus when
you we close schools and during
outbreaks because it turns out kids are
get infected in school and they're like
little virus reactors you know they come
home and they transmit it to mom and dad
and brothers and sisters and so we
closed school sometimes it's Christmas
breaks are always great for kind of
putting the dampening effect on flu in
this case kids are not getting sick very
often at all which is one of the really
good news features of this disease into
China only 2.1 percent of the cases are
under 18 19 years of age why is that you
know we don't completely know and and
I'm going to come down in a second
because they're getting infected it
turns out one study showed that they
still get infected with the virus but
they don't get sick and we have that
happen there's a disease called
infectious hepatitis hepatitis a where
we have outbreaks and daycares and the
way we know I have an outbreak is
because it's transmitted through the
stool fecal-oral his mom and dad and the
daycare providers all get sick and the
kids don't symptoms we go in and test
the kids they're all positive so some
diseases will manifest my primary in
your adult but not as a child this one
appears to be the same so do we close
schools or not if we're not really
spreading the disease because it turns
out that if we close schools we had a
recent study done showed that 38% of
nurses today in this country who are
working in the medical carrier have kids
in school and if suddenly we're closing
schools for two or three months who's
going to take care of those kids
one-fourth of the American population
has no sick leave if we close schools
they don't get paid if they have to stay
home
so when you ask what can we do we have
to really be thoughtful about what we do
are we doing more harm than good by
closing schools for example even though
everybody will say all we got to do
everything we can
where do we just help people you know
it's going to be limiting your contact
as much as you can and that's really
about what we can do and limiting the
contact is that really going to help it
does because it's like putting rods in a
reaction if you if you don't have as
much close contact you can you know not
transmit as much if I'm if I'm sitting
in a room with a hundred people and
we're kind of sharing air the
transmissions remarkable right here you
off the coast of California you've got
your cruise ship cruise ships are
notorious for recirculating air inside
the inner cabins we've had a number of
outbreaks that's why they're having
these outbreaks on cruise ships and then
you leave them around there I think the
cruelest human experiment we've done in
a long time does leave them on these
ships get them off right away should
they get them all absolutely we do with
them well they can put them in
quarantine of some kind of if they want
and follow up on them but you're
guaranteed they're all gonna keep
getting infected day after day it seems
like we're not really prepared for
something like this although the the CDC
has been telling us for a long time that
we should be you know we are not
prepared at all in the sense you know I
wrote the book deadliest enemies that
was published in 2017 thank you thank
you go get it no an Manik in a chapter
13 the title of the chapter was SARS and
MERS a harbinger of things to come
you know predicted this and then I wrote
a chapter on their what a flu pandemic
would look like if it emerged in China
and if you read it it's exactly what's
happened the supply chains went down
China locked down the country it spread
to other countries people all pointed
fingers and you know it's it's the kind
of thing where we hear it and hear it Bo
don't get prepared you know five years
ago I gave a talk at the Mayo Clinic
first time I talked about this I've
talked many times afterwards and I
showed a slide to Puerto Rico picture
was for Rico and then I showed the map
and then I showed a picture of a
building in Puerto Rico nondescript
building and I said this is our next big
disaster it turns out that 85% of all
the world's production of IV bags was
saline that we need desperately were
made in these plants in Puerto Rico and
all we needed was one one category five
hurricane to come through and take it
out Maria came through you
and a half ago and the world went into a
major crisis with shortage of IV bags
now that was so obvious that was going
to happen and yet we don't prepare
that's so foolish I know I agree and
that's what hopefully this is a wake-up
call the business community I hopefully
will wake up you know one of the other
things we're doing right now
Joe this is really one of the things
that has been most concerned about this
whole situation is our group has been
studying for the last year and a half
with support from the Walton family
foundation looking at critical drug
shortages it turns out that we
identified a hundred and fifty three
drugs in this country that people need
right now or they died I mean it's on
the crash cart it's acute critical drugs
a hundred percent are more generic all
of them basically are made offshore of
the United States and large partum are
made in China and India and at this
point we have shortages anyway every day
just before this crisis happened now
these supply chains have gone down our
group is actively helping the United
States government try to figure out you
know where they can get these drugs now
just think of this if I came to you and
said the Defense Department was going to
outsource all this to munitions
production to China you'd look at me and
say come on you know what the US Defense
Department has no more access to these
drugs and anybody else
they are beholden to China for these
drugs six hundred ninety thousand
Americans have end-stage renal disease
right now most of their primary drugs
are coming from China and now with the
shutdown and what's happening with this
and this is what I talked about in the
book why I was so concerned because we
are at risk so even this situation is
unfold it's not just about what the
virus does to you it's about what the
entire system is rigged up to be and
what this virus does once it gets into
it Jesus you making me nervous well but
that's before we get done here we're
gonna talk about what we can do to get
people not nervous because this it's too
late no no no what I mean is we're gonna
we're gonna bring you around to take you
know it's my job is not scary out of
your wits scare you in your woods
[Applause]